# The Veres One Project

The Veres One Project envisions a world where people and organizations
control their identifiers and their identity data. The Veres One
Blockchain is a fit-for-purpose blockchain optimized for identity on the
Web. The network ecosystem is designed to be self-sufficient through the
use of an innovative operational and funding model. The operational model
ensures openness, prevents attacks against the network, and financially
rewards individuals and organizations that choose to run software to
ensure the security of the network. Human dignity demands that every
individual be able to participate equally in our increasingly digital
society. That means everyone deserves the ability create and administer
unique, globally resolvable identifiers. For that reason, the network is
global and open to the public; anyone may participate.

This paper summarizes the problem, vision, solution, value proposition,
network operation, and team. Additional papers will be released in the
coming months that detail the technical and economic topics introduced in
this paper.

## The Problem

To date, every identifier you use online does not belong to you; it
belongs to someone else.

The Internet was not designed with interoperable identity systems in mind.
This inevitably forced websites to create their own solutions, which are
not interoperable.

When you sign up to a website, you typically create a username and a
password. The website asks you for this information so that it can start
to associate data with you. The more benevolent use of this data is to
customize an experience suited to your needs. This identifier and data,
however, are locked away on the site; they are not portable. Even the
global identifiers that websites use, such as your email address, are not
owned by you. The email address "you@gmail.com" isn’t owned by you, it’s
owned by Google. You do not have control over your identifier nor your
data.

Since this data is not portable, you must rebuild your identity
information -- your identifiers and data -- from scratch on many different
websites. Duplicating that information often means sharing more than
intended, allowing websites to learn things and *infer *things about you
that you didn’t expect.. It also means that each website accumulates toxic
data about you, inviting behavior like spam, financial fraud, data
siloing, data warehousing, and identity theft. Initiatives like the
European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) only increase
the pressure to address these problems.

In addition to risks from the information we explicitly share with
websites, there is also a vast amount of identity information already out
there, with few mechanisms for managing it. This outside information is
often combined with the information we share to create surprisingly
detailed profiles, used for everything from ad targeting to site
customization to custom pricing (not always for lower prices). The result
is a strong economic incentive for large data warehousing companies to
store and sell your information, often without your consent.

## Vision

Our vision is to enable all people and organizations in the world to

1. create and own their online identifiers, and

2. control their identity data and with whom they share that data.

Achieving this vision will enable a Web where:

* Our identity information and identifiers are owned and controlled by
each of us.

* We can more strongly prove  key attributes about our digital personas,
reducing fraud.

* Data can be bound to identifiers under our control instead of only to
websites, or stuck on paper in file cabinets, improving data portability.

* Privacy can be enhanced by choosing when and with whom our information
is shared.

* Data sharing can be more easily reduced to the minimum required for a
given interaction.

This vision is shared among a large community of people working within
global organizations such as the Internet Identity Workshop, World Wide
Web Consortium, Internet Engineering Task Force, United Nations ID2020,
and the Rebooting the Web of Trust project.

## Mission

The mission of the Veres One Project is to facilitate the creation of
software and provide the ecosystem governance to enable anyone in the
world to create and manage their own decentralized identifiers.

Potential applications include, but are not limited to portable
credentials for use in education, healthcare, government, trade, finance,
and humanitarian efforts. Further information on application sectors can
be found in:
[https://docs.veres.one/sectors/](https://docs.veres.one/sectors/)

## Solution

To achieve the vision stated above, the communities working on the problem
have identified a solution that is composed of three architectural
layers:

<table>
<tr>
<td>Decentralized Identity Management</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Verifiable Credentials</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Decentralized Identifiers</td>
</tr>
</table>


The foundational layer, Decentralized Identifiers, enables
Self-Administered Identifiers which means that any device, person, or
organization in the world can create and control their own identifiers.
Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) are complementary to the Domain Name
System (DNS) that is in widespread use today with one important
difference: with DNS you lease your identifiers instead of owning them,
whereas with DIDs, you own your identifiers.  The second layer, Verifiable
Credentials, enables one to store and control one’s digital credentials
such as passports, drivers licenses, educational qualifications,
professional licenses, and other third-party issued credentials. Finally,
the third layer is Decentralized Identity Management, which enables one to
control when, under what restrictions, and with whom their identity
information, called a Verifiable Profile, is shared via software
applications and digital wallets.

With Self-Administered Identifiers, such as DIDs, individuals can
establish independent, Verifiable Profiles, comprised of Verifiable
Credentials from recognized authorities. For example, combining a subset
of a college transcript with a proof of age from the Department of Motor
Vehicles to present to a prospective employer, both referring to the same
Decentralized Identifier, either directly or indirectly. These Verifiable
Profiles can be selectively shared with trusted parties, leveraging
Decentralized Identifiers and Verifiable Credentials to give individuals
greater control over our online identity.

The goal of the Veres One Project is to be a provider for the most
foundational piece of the vision: Decentralized Identifiers.

The Veres One Blockchain is a fit-for-purpose blockchain built
specifically for Decentralized Identifiers. This specialization enables
the blockchain to be faster, more cost effective, and more privacy
enhancing compared to existing blockchains that are being repurposed for
identity management. The Veres One Ecosystem is:

* **Public** - Anyone in the world may read and audit the entire contents
of the ledger.

* **Permissionless** - Any person or organization in the world may create
and control their identifiers.

* **Leaderless**** **- Blockchain consensus relies on leaderless elector
collaboration, not proof of work, to determine when consensus has been
finalized. Electors are selected dynamically to allow participants to join
and leave the network and to ensure that there is no centralization or
single point of failure for the ledger.

* **Based entirely on open standards and open specifications **- Broad
implementation and interoperability can only be achieved if all aspects of
the system are documented and standardized in a non-discriminatory,
patent-free and royalty-free manner while ensuring that the creators and
maintainers of the system are properly funded.

* **Built on a stakeholder driven governance model** - The source code and
development team have a strict mission-driven focus that always puts the
users of the ledger first.

* **Economically sustainable** - The people that create, run, and protect
the network are paid by the Veres One Project to do so. Avoiding a
"tragedy of the commons" is essential for sound network economics for a
global public utility.

* **Non-speculative** - Unlike other ledgers, the Veres One Blockchain
does not need a speculative network token or cryptocurrency, which
eliminates currency speculation, thus ensuring predictable long term
operational costs.

## How it Works

The Veres One ecosystem consists of a number of roles:

* The **Board of Governors** is responsible for governance. This includes
ensuring the proper execution of the Veres One Project mission and
managing, collecting, and distributing funds according to the funding
model.

* The **Maintainer** is responsible for maintaining the Veres One software
including continuous security review, managing community contributions,
correcting software defects, and implementing new features.

* **Nodes** are responsible for providing computational and storage
resources for the Network. As the system is permissionless, any person or
organization may run one or more Nodes.

* The **Network** is a collection of Nodes that maintain the decentralized
ledger.

* **Entities** (people, organizations, and devices) use the Network to
create and update decentralized identifiers and their associated
metadata.

* **Accelerators** enable entities to increase the speed at which Entities
can create and update identifiers on the Network.

Entities may use the Veres One Network to create decentralized identifiers
via software applications such as digital wallets. There are two
mechanisms for creating Decentralized Identifiers on the Network. Both
mechanisms require roughly $1 USD to perform, which is derived from the
estimated cost of running the Network. Updates to the Decentralized
Identifier require roughly $0.25 USD to perform or between 2%-4% of what
the Accelerator charges to write a particular type of data to the
blockchain, whichever is greater. The first approach is to pay an
Accelerator to create a Decentralized Identifier, which happens as quickly
as the Network can come to consensus (a few minutes).  The second
mechanism is to submit a creation request to the Network with an
associated proof of work, which typically takes 6-9 hours for a software
application to generate. Once the Network verifies the proof of work and
comes to consensus, the Decentralized Identifier will be created.

The Veres One Project collects proceeds from Accelerators at agreed upon
rates set by the Board of Governors and distributes the funds according to
current operational needs. Accelerators fees will be waived on a recurring
basis for a fixed number of humanitarian uses, such as providing portable
digital credentials to refugees for asylum-seeking purposes. Further
information related to Use of Funds is outlined later in this document.

## Deployment

The Veres One Blockchain Testnet is available for immediate use with node
and developer documentation published at
[https://docs.veres.one/](https://docs.veres.one/). The live network is
slated for a Q1 2018 launch.

## Team and Community

Our passion to realize Self-Administered Identity is something we share
with a substantial and growing community. There is broad interest and
activity from a variety of very capable technologists. The strength of
this community is why these efforts will bear fruit.

**[Digital Bazaar](https://digitalbazaar.com/)** is the **Founder**, and
is the company that created the Veres One Blockchain technology and has
been spearheading work on payments, identity, and blockchain for the Web
for over 14 years. Manu Sporny, the CEO, and Dave Longley, the CTO, have
co-invented numerous technologies like Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs),
Verifiable Credentials, Linked Data Signatures, the Web Ledger protocol,
JSON-LD, and a variety of other technologies broadly deployed by large
multinational organizations such as Google, Microsoft, Yandex, and the
BBC. The organization is also under contract to the United States
Department of Homeland Security to provide analysis of Blockchain
technologies and standardize technologies that produce a competitive
marketplace for identity solutions. Self-Administered Identity is one
component of Digital Bazaar’s vision for the next generation Web which
ensures that every person on the planet has global identities that they
control and has access to the global economy.

**Blockchain Architecture Services LLC **is the initial **Maintainer**; a
new technology company that has been formed for the primary purpose of
technological management and development of the Veres One software and
network. This organization is responsible for proper security reviews, new
features identified as critical to the proper operation of the network,
and additional features that are supportive of the Veres One Mission.
Blockchain Architecture Services LLC and Digital Bazaar will initially
share employees until the Maintainer team is fully staffed. Blockchain
Architecture Services LLC reports to the **Board of Governors**.

The **Veres One Project** is operated under a non-profit organization (to
be announced) and houses the **Board of Governors**, which is responsible
for ensuring the proper execution of the Veres One Mission, selecting the
**Maintainer**, and managing, collecting, and distributing funds according
to the funding model to organizations like
**[Spec-Ops](https://spec-ops.io/)**, who develop open standards and
reference implementations as open source software.

Since 2005, the [Internet Identity
Workshop](http://www.internetidentityworkshop.com) (IIW) has been the
world’s leading innovation forum for concepts like Self-Administered
Identity.  A vision holder and catalytic workshop to make real the vision
of an identity layer of the Internet that works for people. It continues
to gather every six months to move the specifications and implementations
of the vision forward.

**[Rebooting Web of Trust](http://www.weboftrust.info/)** (RWOT) is a
community of technologists, cryptographers, philosophers, ethnographers,
and other domain experts developing scientific papers, technology, and
specifications for Self-Administered Technology. The community has been
focused on refining Linked Data Signatures, Verifiable Credentials, and
Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs).

The **[World Wide Web Consortium](https://www.w3.org/)** (W3C) creates the
next generation standards for the Web. Employees of **Digital Bazaar**
have been deeply involved in the creation of next generation Web standards
over the past two decades. The Veres One Project will always strive to be
100% compliant with the standards the Veres One Blockchain uses and will
help create new standards where none exist via the W3C and other pertinent
standards organizations.

## Fundraising and Use of Funds

The Veres One Blockchain software already exists, which eliminates the
need for a Token Pre-Sale, a Simple Agreement for Future Tokens (SAFT), or
an Initial Coin Offering (ICO) to develop the network software. In
addition, avoiding the burden of tens of millions of dollars or more in
investor returns ensures that Veres One can launch with the minimal amount
of ecosystem debt in order to drive ecosystem costs down as low as
possible. As the network scales, the marginal cost of using the ledger is
expected to decrease even further.

The primary use of funds will be to ensure network stability for decades
to come. The non-profit Veres One Project, which governs the Veres One
Blockchain, will receive the bulk of the funds to pay for continued
software development and security reviews, incentivize nodes running the
ledger as well as for governance and administrative tasks. All funds
allocation, other than for the Founder, will be at the discretion of the
Veres One Project. The graph below is a suggested starting point.

Blockchain Architecture Services LLC will have the initial software
support contract to maintain and advance the Veres One Blockchain. A
significant portion of funding will also be directed to open source, open
standards, and incubation efforts that support the development of
Self-Administered technology while the rest will be used to ensure global
legal compliance and support the growing community.

![image alt text](images/disbursement.png)

*The Founder is capped at $25M USD per annum in the event that aggregate
revenues exceed $500M USD per annum.*

## Further Reading

This document provides an initial summary of the Veres One Project.
Readers that would like to learn more about this initiative may find the
following more detailed documentation and specifications useful:

* [Decentralized Identifier
Specification](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-spec/) - The technical
specification for Decentralized Identifiers.

* [Veres One Testnet Website](https://testnet.veres.one/) - The Veres One
Testnet website used by software developers to test the website.

* [Verifiable Credentials
Specification](https://w3c.github.io/vc-data-model/) - The technical
specification for W3C Verifiable Credentials, which use Decentralized
Identifiers and the Veres One Blockchain.

* [Self-Administered Identity
Primer](https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/self-sovereign-identity-primer.md)
- An introduction to Self-Administered identity.

* [Rebooting the Web of Trust](http://www.weboftrust.info/) - The series
of workshops that are incubating much of the work that led to the Veres
One Blockchain.

## Disclaimer

<table>
<tr>
<td>Summary: The Veres One Project, including its affiliates, are not
offering network tokens using a Token Pre-Sale, Simple Agreement for
Future Tokens (SAFT), an Initial Coin Offering (ICO), or any other
speculative token or cryptocurrency sale mechanism. </td>
</tr>
</table>


This page is a summary of the current and future developments of the Veres
One Blockchain. This page is for information purposes only.

The information set forth in this page is not exhaustive and does not
imply any elements of a contractual relationship. The content of this page
is not binding for Blockchain Architecture Services LLC ("Company" ) and
its affiliates and Company reserves the right to change, translate,
modify, add, or remove portions of this page for any reason at any time
before, during and after the publication of this document by posting
the amended page at the following location:
[https://docs.veres.one/summary/](https://docs.veres.one/summary/)

Unless expressly specified otherwise, the products, services and
innovations detailed in this document are currently under development and
are not currently deployed. The creators of this page and all persons
associated with the preparation and/or publication of this page each
disclaim to the fullest extent permitted by law any and all warranties
implied by law.

Nothing in this page shall be deemed to constitute a prospectus of any
sort or a solicitation for investment, nor does it in any way pertain to
an offering or a solicitation of an offer to buy any securities in any
jurisdiction.
